Restructure metrics v3 readme for docs use (#20114)
Minio-io/minio: docs/metrics/v3.md

# Metrics Version 3

In metrics version 3, all metrics are available under the following base endpoint:

```
/minio/metrics/v3
```

To query metrics of a specific type, append the appropriate path to the base endpoint.

> You **must** append a path, as querying the base endpoint alone does not return metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Querying the base endpoint returns no meaningful data.
```

If we return a 200OK then mod the above to state "returns a `200 OK` and no metrics."

Author: If we can get an answer for this, I think we are done.

Reviewer 2: We return an error 404.

Metrics are organized into groups at paths **relative** to the top-level endpoint above.

Metrics are also available using the [MinIO Admin Client](https://min.io/docs/minio/linux/reference/minio-mc-admin.html) and the `mc admin prometheus metrics` command. For more information, see [Metrics and Alerts](https://min.io/docs/minio/linux/operations/monitoring/metrics-and-alerts.html) in the MinIO Documentation.

## Metrics Request Handling

Each endpoint can be queried as needed via a scrape configuration in Prometheus or a compatible metrics collection tool. You should schedule scrape operations so a prior scrape completes before the next one begins.

> For ease of configuration, each (non-empty) parent of the path serves all the metric endpoints at its child paths. For example, to query all system metrics scrape `/minio/metrics/v3/system/`.

Reviewer: This might make more sense if we provide a sample tree. Spitballing.

```
Each metric endpoint may support multiple child endpoints. For example, the `/v3/system/` metric has five child groups as `/v3/system/<child>`. Querying the parent endpoint returns metrics for all child groups.
Querying a child group returns only metrics for that child.
```

> Some metrics are bucket specific. These will have a `/bucket` component in their path. As the number of buckets can be large, the metrics scrape operation must provide a list of buckets with the `bucket` query parameter. The endpoint then returns only metrics for the given buckets, with the bucket name in a `bucket` label.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metrics with a `/bucket` component in the path return results for each specified bucket in the deployment. These endpoints **require** providing a list of buckets as a `bucket` query parameter.  The endpoint then returns only metrics for the given buckets, with the bucket name in a `bucket` label.
```

Reviewer: This seems important. Maybe make it an H3 and reference it for metric groups that have bucket components.

Author: Reworked this and following paragraph so using H3 makes more sense

# Metrics Version 3

In metrics version 3, all metrics are available under the following base endpoint:

```
/minio/metrics/v3
```

To query metrics of a specific type, append the appropriate path to the base endpoint.

> You **must** append a path, as querying the base endpoint alone does not return metrics.

Author: ```suggestion
Querying the base endpoint returns "404 Not Found."
```

> Instead of a metrics scrape, it is also possible to list the metrics that would be returned by a path. This is done by adding a `?list` query parameter. The MinIO server will then list all possible metrics that could be returned. During an actual metrics scrape, only available metrics are returned - not all of them. With the `list` query parameter, the output format can be selected - just set the request `Content-Type` to `application/json` for JSON output, or `text/plain` for a simple markdown formatted table. The latter is the default.

Reviewer 3: The parameter is listed as `?list` in one spot and then `list` in the other.
To avoid confusion, we should list it the same way in both places.

Author: Removed the ? with the expectation that anybody reading this knows what a query parameter is. An example is a good idea too.

| `minio_cluster_erasure_set_overall_health`       | Overall health across pools and sets (1=healthy, 0=unhealthy). <br><br>Type: gauge                     |                  |
| `minio_cluster_erasure_set_read_quorum`          | Read quorum for the erasure set in a pool. <br><br>Type: gauge                                         | `pool_id`, `set_id` |
| `minio_cluster_erasure_set_write_quorum`         | Write quorum for the erasure set in a pool. <br><br>Type: gauge                                        | `pool_id`, `set_id` |
| `minio_cluster_erasure_set_online_drives_count`  | Count of online drives in the erasure set in a pool. <br><br>Type: gauge                               | `pool_id`, `set_id` |
| `minio_cluster_erasure_set_healing_drives_count` | Count of healing drives in the erasure set in a pool. <br><br>Type: gauge                              | `pool_id`, `set_id` |
| `minio_cluster_erasure_set_health`               | Health of the erasure set in a pool (1=healthy, 0=unhealthy). <br><br>Type: gauge                      | `pool_id`, `set_id` |

> | `minio_cluster_erasure_set_read_tolerance`       | No of drive failures that can be tolerated without disrupting read operations. <br><br>Type: gauge     | `pool_id`, `set_id` |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `minio_cluster_erasure_set_read_tolerance`       | Number of drive failures that can be tolerated without disrupting read operations. <br><br>Type: gauge     | `pool_id`, `set_id` |
```

Alternatively, if space is constrained, then use `No.` with a `.`. Otherwise, this might be difficult for those with less familiarity with English.

Same on the next line.

Reviewer 3: On this, all other sections use `number`, so I'd do that here, too.

> | `minio_cluster_erasure_set_write_tolerance`      | No of drive failures that can be tolerated without disrupting write operations. <br><br>Type: gauge    | `pool_id`, `set_id` |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `minio_cluster_erasure_set_write_tolerance`      | Number of drive failures that can be tolerated without disrupting write operations. <br><br>Type: gauge    | `pool_id`, `set_id` |
```

| `minio_cluster_usage_objects_total_bytes`                | Total cluster usage in bytes. <br><br>Type: gauge                                   |         |
| `minio_cluster_usage_objects_count`                      | Total cluster objects count. <br><br>Type: gauge                                    |         |
| `minio_cluster_usage_objects_versions_count`             | Total cluster object versions (including delete markers) count. <br><br>Type: gauge |         |
| `minio_cluster_usage_objects_delete_markers_count`       | Total cluster delete markers count. <br><br>Type: gauge                             |         |
| `minio_cluster_usage_objects_buckets_count`              | Total cluster buckets count. <br><br>Type: gauge                                    |         |
| `minio_cluster_usage_objects_size_distribution`          | Cluster object size distribution. <br><br>Type: gauge                               | `range` |
| `minio_cluster_usage_objects_version_count_distribution` | Cluster object version count distribution. <br><br>Type: gauge                      | `range` |

### Debug metrics

Go runtime metrics for debugging.

> For details of individual metrics, see TODO

Reviewer 3: `see TODO`?

Author: It would be good to have a link here, since we don't enumerate the individual metrics. Still trying to determine what.

I think they come from a Go method that dumps whatever runtime metrics it knows about at the time.

| `minio_logger_webhook_queue_length`     | Webhook queue length. <br><br>Type: gauge                           | `server`, `name`, `endpoint` |
| `minio_logger_webhook_total_message`    | Total number of messages sent to this target. <br><br>Type: counter | `server`, `name`, `endpoint` |

### Notification metrics

Metrics about the MinIO notification functionality.

| Path            | Description                                    |
|-----------------|------------------------------------------------|
| `/notification` | Metrics related to notification functionality. |

#### `/notification`

| Name                                          | Description                                                                                                     | Labels   |
|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|
| `minio_notification_current_send_in_progress` | Number of concurrent async Send calls active to all targets. <br><br>Type: counter                              | `server` |

> | `minio_notification_events_errors_total`      | Events that were failed to be sent to the targets. <br><br>Type: counter                                        | `server` |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `minio_notification_events_errors_total`      | Events that failed to send to the targets. <br><br>Type: counter                                        | `server` |
```

| `minio_notification_events_sent_total`        | Total number of events sent to the targets. <br><br>Type: counter                                               | `server` |

> | `minio_notification_events_skipped_total`     | Events that were skipped to be sent to the targets due to the in-memory queue being full. <br><br>Type: counter | `server` |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `minio_notification_events_skipped_total`     | Events not sent to the targets due to the in-memory queue being full. <br><br>Type: counter | `server` |
```

| `minio_replication_max_active_workers`            | Maximum number of active replication workers seen since server start. <br><br>Type: gauge        | `server` |
| `minio_replication_max_queued_bytes`              | Maximum number of bytes queued for replication since server start. <br><br>Type: gauge           | `server` |
| `minio_replication_max_queued_count`              | Maximum number of objects queued for replication since server start. <br><br>Type: gauge         | `server` |
| `minio_replication_max_data_transfer_rate`        | Maximum replication data transfer rate in bytes/sec seen since server start. <br><br>Type: gauge | `server` |

#### `/bucket/replication`

| Name                                                                | Description                                                                                                      | Labels                                    |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|

> | `minio_bucket_replication_last_hour_failed_bytes`                   | Total number of bytes failed at least once to replicate in the last hour on a bucket. <br><br>Type: gauge        | `bucket`, `server`                           |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `minio_bucket_replication_last_hour_failed_bytes`                   | Total number of bytes on a bucket that failed to replicate at least once in the last hour. <br><br>Type: gauge        | `bucket`, `server`                           |
```

> | `minio_bucket_replication_last_hour_failed_count`                   | Total number of objects which failed replication in the last hour on a bucket. <br><br>Type: gauge               | `bucket`, `server`                           |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `minio_bucket_replication_last_hour_failed_count`                   | Total number of objects on a bucket which failed to replicate in the last hour. <br><br>Type: gauge               | `bucket`, `server`                           |
```

> | `minio_bucket_replication_last_minute_failed_bytes`                 | Total number of bytes failed at least once to replicate in the last full minute on a bucket. <br><br>Type: gauge | `bucket`, `server`                           |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `minio_bucket_replication_last_minute_failed_bytes`                 | Total number of bytes on a bucket that failed to replicate at least once in the last full minute. <br><br>Type: gauge | `bucket`, `server`                           |
```

> | `minio_bucket_replication_last_minute_failed_count`                 | Total number of objects which failed replication in the last full minute on a bucket. <br><br>Type: gauge        | `bucket`, `server`                           |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `minio_bucket_replication_last_minute_failed_count`                 | Total number of objects on a bucket which failed to replicate in the last full minute. <br><br>Type: gauge        | `bucket`, `server`                           |
```

| `minio_bucket_replication_proxied_head_requests_total`              | Number of HEAD requests proxied to replication target. <br><br>Type: counter                                     | `bucket`, `server`                           |
| `minio_bucket_replication_proxied_put_tagging_requests_failures`    | Number of failures in PUT tagging requests proxied to replication target. <br><br>Type: counter                  | `bucket`, `server`                           |
| `minio_bucket_replication_proxied_put_tagging_requests_total`       | Number of PUT tagging requests proxied to replication target. <br><br>Type: counter                              | `bucket`, `server`                           |
| `minio_bucket_replication_sent_bytes`                               | Total number of bytes replicated to the target. <br><br>Type: counter                                            | `bucket`, `server`                           |
| `minio_bucket_replication_sent_count`                               | Total number of objects replicated to the target. <br><br>Type: counter                                          | `bucket`, `server`                           |

> | `minio_bucket_replication_total_failed_bytes`                       | Total number of bytes failed at least once to replicate since server start. <br><br>Type: counter                | `bucket`, `server`                           |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `minio_bucket_replication_total_failed_bytes`                       | Total number of bytes that failed to replicate at least once since server start. <br><br>Type: counter                | `bucket`, `server`                           |
```

> | `minio_bucket_replication_total_failed_count`                       | Total number of objects which failed replication since server start. <br><br>Type: counter                       | `bucket`, `server`                           |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `minio_bucket_replication_total_failed_count`                       | Total number of objects that failed to replicate since server start. <br><br>Type: counter                       | `bucket`, `server`                           |
```

| `minio_system_process_go_routine_total`            | Total number of go routines running. <br><br>Type: gauge                                                                              | `server` |
| `minio_system_process_io_rchar_bytes`              | Total bytes read by the process from the underlying storage system including cache, /proc/[pid]/io rchar. <br><br>Type: counter       | `server` |
| `minio_system_process_io_read_bytes`               | Total bytes read by the process from the underlying storage system, /proc/[pid]/io read_bytes. <br><br>Type: counter                  | `server` |
| `minio_system_process_io_wchar_bytes`              | Total bytes written by the process to the underlying storage system including page cache, /proc/[pid]/io wchar. <br><br>Type: counter | `server` |
| `minio_system_process_io_write_bytes`              | Total bytes written by the process to the underlying storage system, /proc/[pid]/io write_bytes. <br><br>Type: counter                | `server` |

> | `minio_system_process_start_time_seconds`          | Start time for MinIO process in seconds since Unix epoc. <br><br>Type: gauge                                                          | `server` |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `minio_system_process_start_time_seconds`          | Start time for MinIO process in seconds since Unix epoch. <br><br>Type: gauge                                                          | `server` |
```

|-----------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| `/api/requests` | Metrics over all requests                        |
| `/bucket/api`   | Metrics over all requests for a given bucket     |

### Audit metrics

These are metrics about the MinIO audit functionality.

| Path     | Description                            |
|----------|----------------------------------------|
| `/audit` | Metrics related to audit functionality |

### Cluster metrics

These present metrics about the whole MinIO cluster.

| Path                     | Description                 |
|--------------------------|-----------------------------|
| `/cluster/health`        | Cluster health metrics      |
| `/cluster/usage/objects` | Object statistics           |
| `/cluster/usage/buckets` | Object statistics by bucket |
| `/cluster/erasure-set`   | Erasure set metrics         |

### Debug metrics

These are metrics for debugging

| Path                        | Description                                       |
|-----------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|

> | `/debug/go`                 | Standard Go lang metrics                          |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `/debug/go`                 | Go runtime metrics                          |
```

Author: Thanks! I'll pick this up after I'm done arguing with `csplit` 😄

| `minio_bucket_api_traffic_sent_bytes`        | Total number of bytes received for a bucket. <br><br>Type: counter                      | `bucket,type,server,pool_index`         |
| `minio_bucket_api_inflight_total`            | Total number of requests currently in flight for a bucket. <br><br>Type: gauge          | `bucket,name,type,server,pool_index`    |
| `minio_bucket_api_total`                     | Total number of requests for a bucket. <br><br>Type: counter                            | `bucket,name,type,server,pool_index`    |
| `minio_bucket_api_canceled_total`            | Total number of requests canceled by the client for a bucket. <br><br>Type: counter     | `bucket,name,type,server,pool_index`    |
| `minio_bucket_api_4xx_errors_total`          | Total number of requests with 4xx errors for a bucket. <br><br>Type: counter            | `bucket,name,type,server,pool_index`    |
| `minio_bucket_api_5xx_errors_total`          | Total number of requests with 5xx errors for a bucket. <br><br>Type: counter            | `bucket,name,type,server,pool_index`    |

> | `minio_bucket_api_ttfb_seconds_distribution` | Distribution of time to first byte across API calls for a bucket. <br><br>Type: counter | `bucket,name,le,type,server,pool_index` |

Author: Testing a possible format change: move metric type into the description, with explicit line breaks, drop Type column
